You give your agent a task, it starts running.
You check back 20 minutes later, it's still running.
Your bill just hit $40, and it hasn't made a single useful change.
That's not a model problem.
The model is doing exactly what you told it.
The problem is the harness around it, specifically the harness failed to prevent.
There are four ways a harness can go wrong.
Once you see them, you will recognize them everywhere.
These 4 failure modes aren't random bugs, they are architectural gaps.
Things are naive, harness leaves open by default.
A harness that does nothing special will loop forever, bury itself in junk, hand the model a hundred tools it can't choose between
and let it delete your database on the first bad suggestion.
Here is each one and the exact fix.
The agentic loop has no natural stopping condition by design.
Each iteration costs tokens.
Input tokens for the full context you are resending every turn plus output tokens for
the reply.
On a 200,000 token context, one loop iteration can cost 30 cents, 50 iterations, 15 dollars.
And a model that's stuck chasing a bug it can't reproduce or oscillating between two
tool calls will happily loop until you stop it or your credit card does.
The fix has two parts.
Hard iteration limits.
Set a max iteration's budget before the agent starts.
Not a suggestion.
A kill switch.
Claude code's default is around 200.
Production systems are often tighter, 10 to 20 for focused tasks.
Stall detection.
If the last three tool calls are identical you are in a loop.
Surface it.
Stop the agent.
Ask the human what to do next.
Don't let the model retry its way to the bankruptcy.
But iterations are just one meter.
Runaway cost runs on three.
Steps, tokens and wall clock time.
So budget all the three.
A token card.
A hard time out.
Not only a loop limit.
Very serious framework shifts these now.
LangGraph halts at 25 steps by default.
AutoGen has a separate token and time out cutoffs.
The OpenAI agent's SDK cap turns and throws the moment you blow past it.
And the smartest stop isn't a counter at all.
It's progress.
If the tests are still red and the file is unchanged, the agent isn't working.
It's failing.
Stop on no progress even at iteration three.
One number to hold onto.
Cost scales with context length times iterations.
A bloated context makes runaway loops catastrophically expensive.
Here is the one that surprises people.
A longer conversation makes the model dumber.
The model re-reads the entire context every single turn.
Early in a task, the context is tight.
System prompt, tools, the goal.
But tool results pile up fast.
A grep that returned 800 lines.
A file read that was only partially relevant.
A failed attempt that's now just noise.
By turn 30, the model is wading through thousands of tokens
of junk to find the three lines that actually matter.
This is context rot.
And it causes real regressions.
The model starts losing the thread,
contradicting its earlier decisions,
forgetting things it knew 10 turns ago.
The fix is context engineering.
You don't dump everything into the prompt.
You curate it.
Summaries instead of raw tool output.
Truncated file reads with the relevant section highlighted.
Compaction that preserves decisions, not transcripts.
Curation has a deeper move than trimming.
Get the junk out of the window entirely.
Offload to a subagent.
Let a helper burn 30,000 tokens reading
and hand back a 2,000 token summary.
The noise never touches the main thread.
Write to a memory file.
Notes on disk, the agent re-reads.
So state outlives the window.
And mind the middle.
Models reliably lose what's buried
in the middle of a long context.
It's a U-shaped curve, sharp at the start and end,
weak in between, and a bigger window doesn't fix it.
Put what matters at the edges.
Think of the harness as the model's working memory.
Treat it like RAM, not a hard drive.
Keep only what the model needs right now.
Everything else is noise.
And noise costs you IQ points per turn.
More tools feels like more power, it's not.
When you hand a model 50 tools, you have given it a decision problem on every turn.
Which tool fits here, read file or get file contents, search code base or grep files.
The names blur, the descriptions overlap and the model makes bad picks or hedges, calling
two tools where one would do.
Tool sprawl also inflates the context directly.
Every tool definition, name, description, typed parameters, costs tokens before the
model writes a single character.
50 tools can burn 8000 tokens on tool schemas alone.
The fix?
Fewer, sharper tools.
Each tool should do one thing with an unmistakable name.
If two tools are overlapping descriptions, merge them or delete them.
Cloud Code ships around 15 core tools, not as a limitation, but as a deliberate design
choice.
The model picks faster and picks better when the menu is short.
A good rule of thumb, if you can't describe what a tool does in 5 words, it's too vague
to be useful.
But there is a sharper move than trimming the list by hand.
Low tools on demand.
Keep the big catalog, just expose the 3 to 5 relevant tools each turn, in Anthropics own
testing that took 58 tools.
55,000 tokens before you type a word, down to about 3,000 and lifted tool selection accuracy
from 49 to 74%.
Same model, shorter menu.
One level further with Code Mode.
Let the model write code that calls the tools and filters the results before they ever hit
the context.
Anthropic measured a 37% token cut on complex tasks that fixes tool sprawl and context rot
in one stroke.
The most dangerous failure is the quite one.
An agent that auto approves everything will eventually do something catastrophic.
Not because it's malicious, because it's confident.
Models are fluent and decisive.
They propose force pushes, schema drops, curl to shell scripts with the same calm tone they
use to suggest a variable rename.
Over-permission is trusting that tone.
The fix is a three tier permission model.
Read-only actions, file reads, searches, directory listings, auto-approved, no interruption.
State changing actions, edits, API calls, package installs, pause and surface to the
human before executing.
Destructive or irreversible actions, deletes, force pushes, anything touching production,
blocked by default, require explicit opt-in every single time.
The keyword is irreversible.
Ask this about every tool.
If the model calls this on bad data, can I undo it in 30 seconds?
If the answer is no, that tool needs a gate.
If the answer is I can't undo it at all, it needs a hard block.
But tiers only decide what's allowed.
Two more layers decide what happens when something slips through.
Sandbox it.
Run the agent in a box that can only touch its working directory and only reach the domains
you approve.
Everything else is walled off.
Anthropic says this alone cut their permission prompts by around 84%.
Contain the blast radius and you don't need to vet every single move.
Know the real threat.
The nightmare isn't a clumsy agent, it's a hijacked one.
Simon Willison calls it the lethal trifecta.
The moment an agent can read private data, ingest untrusted content and send data out,
one poisoned webpage or email can turn its own permissions against you.
The fix is to break one leg, cut its ability to phone home or gate the send email and external
right actions specifically.
And keep an undo, plan then apply, approve the diff before it lands like terraform, checkpoints
and git commits so any bad write is one command from gone.
Notice what all four fixes have in common.
They are defaults, a harness that does nothing will loop forever, rot its own context, drown
the model in tools, and let it run free with no guardrails.
Every single fix is something you have to deliberately add.
That's the mindset shift.
Building an agent isn't just picking the right model and plugging in tools.
It's designing the constraints, the budgets, the curated context, the short menus and the
permission tiers that keep a capable but directionless system actually useful.
The model thinks the harness makes sure it doesn't think itself into a corner.
4 failure modes - 4 fixes Runaway loop - Hard iteration budgets and
stall detection Context rot - curate the prompt, don't just
append Tool sprawl - fewer, sharper tools with unmistakable
names Over permission - read auto, write gate, destroy
block If your agent is behaving strangely, odds
are it's one of those four Now you know exactly where to look
If this clicked hit like and subscribe. There is more where this came from plenty
more deep dives on building agents that actually work. See you in the next one.